HELIX ROBOTICS — INCIDENT POSTMORTEM
Incident: INC-2024-017
Title: Charge dock reservation deadlock, Cardinal Foods Memphis DC
Severity: SEV-1
Date of incident: 2024-09-14
Postmortem date: 2024-09-19
Author: Jae-won Park (Staff Engineer, Scheduling)
Reviewers: Dana Whitfield (CTO), Rosa Iglesias (SRE Lead), Marcus Ozturk
          (Director of Field Operations), Deepa Nair (QA Manager)
Status: Closed — all action items completed 2024-11-08
Classification: Internal. A redacted customer-facing summary was delivered to
                Cardinal Foods on 2024-09-23.


SUMMARY

On Saturday 2024-09-14, 61 of the 240 HX-200 units at the Cardinal Foods
Memphis distribution center became permanently stuck holding charging dock
reservations they would never release. Because dock reservations in Fleet OS
4.2.1 had no expiry, the affected robots occupied the dock queue indefinitely,
starving healthy robots of the ability to charge. Fleet throughput degraded
progressively over roughly seven hours as more units drained and joined the
queue behind the stuck ones.

Cardinal Foods experienced a 6 hour 47 minute period of degraded fulfillment
during their Saturday inbound shift, with peak throughput loss of 71 percent.
They missed two outbound trailer departures. Under the Enterprise SLA this was
assessed as a qualifying availability breach and resulted in a service credit of
148,000 USD, recognized in Q3 2024.

The root cause was an interaction between two changes that were each correct in
isolation: a firmware change to how battery state of charge is reported, and a
Fleet OS scheduler that compared that value with a strict inequality. Neither
version had been tested against the other.


IMPACT

  - Customer: Cardinal Foods, Memphis DC (Enterprise tier, largest deployment)
  - Duration: 2024-09-14 06:12 CDT to 12:59 CDT (6h 47m)
  - Robots affected: 61 of 240 directly deadlocked; effectively the full fleet
    degraded as the dock queue backed up
  - Throughput: peak loss 71 percent against baseline for the shift
  - Business impact to customer: 2 missed outbound trailers, approximately
    4,100 units of delayed fulfillment
  - Financial impact to Helix: 148,000 USD SLA credit; approximately 90
    engineering-hours of unplanned remediation work
  - Safety impact: none. No robot moved unsafely at any point. No injuries, no
    property damage, no near-miss reports filed.
  - Data impact: none.


TIMELINE (all times CDT)

2024-08-19  Firmware 3.8.1 released to general availability. Among other
            changes, it altered battery state-of-charge reporting from an
            integer percentage to a float, and introduced a 0.5 percent
            hysteresis band on the reported value to suppress oscillation near
            reporting boundaries. The change was made to fix a cosmetic issue
            where SoC readings visibly flickered between adjacent integers on
            the Operator Console. It was reviewed, tested against Fleet OS
            4.1.x, and shipped without incident.

2024-09-03  Cardinal Foods Memphis completed a staged firmware rollout to
            3.8.1 across all 240 units. The site was already running Fleet OS
            4.2.1. This combination — Fleet OS 4.2.1 with firmware 3.8.1 — had
            never been exercised in our test environment.

2024-09-03
to 09-13    Robots began accumulating in the deadlocked state at a low rate,
            roughly two to five units per day. The fleet had sufficient excess
            dock capacity to absorb this, so throughput remained nominal and no
            alert fired. In hindsight the telemetry clearly shows the
            accumulation over this eleven-day window.

2024-09-14
05:40       Saturday inbound shift begins. Higher-than-typical task volume
            drives the whole fleet through charge cycles faster than on a
            weekday.

06:12       Dock queue depth exceeds available capacity for the first time.
            This is the incident start. Healthy robots begin waiting for docks
            held by deadlocked units.

06:12
to 06:53    Progressive degradation. No alert fires. Every individual robot
            reports healthy — the deadlocked units are not faulted, they are
            sitting at a dock in a state the system considers legitimate. Fleet
            OS 4.2.1 had no alerting rule for declining fleet availability, only
            for individual robot faults.

06:53       Cardinal Foods shift supervisor telephones the Helix support line
            to report that "robots are queuing at the chargers and not
            working." Ticket TKT-8841 opened at SEV-2.

07:15       Support escalates to SEV-1 and pages the on-call engineer. Marcus
            Ozturk (Field Operations) notified. Under the Enterprise SLA the
            4-hour critical response commitment is met comfortably; the failure
            was in detection, not in response.

07:15
to 08:30    On-call engineer investigates. Initial hypotheses — Wi-Fi coverage
            degradation, dock hardware failure, WMS task flood — are
            investigated and eliminated. Time is lost here because every
            robot-level health signal is green.

08:30       Jae-won Park joins the call. Identifies that the 61 affected units
            all report SoC values in the narrow band between 20.0 and 20.5
            percent, and that all of them hold dock reservations with no
            progress.

09:05       Root cause understood. See analysis below.

09:20       Mitigation begins: operators manually cancel dock reservations for
            affected units through the Operator Console, one at a time. Each
            cancellation frees a dock. This is slow and entirely manual.

11:40       All 61 reservations manually cleared. Dock queue drains.

12:59       Fleet throughput returns to baseline. Incident end.

2024-09-16  Fleet OS 4.2.2 hotfix released. Changes the SoC threshold
            comparison to use a tolerance band, and adds expiry leases to dock
            reservations.

2024-09-17  Firmware 3.8.2 released, ensuring reported SoC crosses threshold
            boundaries cleanly rather than settling inside the hysteresis band.

2024-09-18  Both patches deployed to Cardinal Foods Memphis. Confirmed
            resolved.

2024-11-08  Final action item (cross-version CI matrix) completed and verified.


ROOT CAUSE ANALYSIS

The Charge Scheduler in Fleet OS 4.2.0 and 4.2.1 released a robot's dock
reservation when the robot's reported state of charge reached or exceeded the
configured target — a strict comparison against the raw reported value, with no
tolerance:

    if reported_soc >= target_soc:
        release_dock_reservation(robot_id)

Firmware 3.8.1 introduced a 0.5 percent hysteresis band on reported SoC. The
intent was cosmetic: stop the console display from flickering between adjacent
values. The effect was that once a robot's true charge settled near a boundary,
the reported value would stabilize inside the band rather than crossing it
cleanly.

The specific pathology: a robot would arrive at a dock reporting just under the
20 percent charge threshold, begin charging, and — for reasons related to how
the hysteresis band interacts with the charge curve's initial fast-rise region —
latch a reported value in the 20.0 to 20.5 percent range. The robot was in fact
charging normally and its true SoC continued climbing to full. But the reported
value the scheduler consumed remained pinned inside the band, so the release
condition against the 90 percent target was evaluated against a stale-seeming
figure and never satisfied.

Because dock reservations had no expiry lease — unlike floor segment
reservations, which the Traffic Manager reclaims automatically when a robot
stops reporting progress — nothing in the system ever reclaimed the dock. The
robot sat there, fully charged, holding a reservation forever, reporting itself
perfectly healthy.

Two independent defects had to be present for this to occur:

  1. The strict comparison in the Charge Scheduler, which assumed reported SoC
     was a precise monotonic value. This assumption was undocumented and was
     silently invalidated by the firmware change.

  2. The absence of expiry on dock reservations. This is the more serious of the
     two. Defect 1 caused robots to get stuck; defect 2 is why getting stuck was
     unrecoverable without a human. The Traffic Manager had solved this exact
     class of problem years earlier with leases, and that lesson was simply not
     carried across to the Charge Scheduler.

The contributing cause is a process failure. Fleet OS 4.2.1 and firmware 3.8.1
were each tested thoroughly against the versions current at the time of their
own release. They were never tested against each other, because no automated
cross-version matrix existed. The compatibility matrix was a document, not a
test suite.


DETECTION GAP

41 minutes elapsed between incident start (06:12) and customer notification
(06:53), and the notification came from the customer by telephone rather than
from our monitoring. This is the part of this incident that we consider least
acceptable.

Fleet OS 4.2.1 alerting was built entirely around individual robot health. A
faulted robot alerts. A disconnected robot alerts. A robot that is sitting at a
charger reporting itself healthy does not alert, no matter how many of them
there are and no matter what is happening to fleet throughput.

The condition was trivially visible in aggregate. Robots available for dispatch
declined steadily for eleven days. Dock queue depth had been climbing for eleven
days. No rule looked at either number.


WHAT WENT WELL

  - The safety architecture held completely. Firmware retained authority over
    motion throughout; no robot moved unsafely, and the system degraded into a
    static, safe state rather than an unpredictable one.
  - Once escalated, response was fast and the SLA response commitment was met
    with substantial margin.
  - Telemetry retention was sufficient to reconstruct the full eleven-day
    accumulation, which made root cause analysis conclusive rather than
    speculative.
  - The manual reservation-cancel path in the Operator Console existed and
    worked, giving operators a way out.


WHAT WENT POORLY

  - Detection depended on the customer noticing.
  - Two subsystems solving the same problem (resource reservation) with
    different and inconsistent semantics, where one had learned the lesson and
    the other had not.
  - No cross-version integration testing despite shipping two independently
    versioned software artifacts that must interoperate in the field.
  - Mitigation was manual and per-robot. Clearing 61 reservations took 2 hours
    20 minutes of operator time.
  - The eleven-day accumulation window was a free warning that we did not
    collect.


ACTION ITEMS

AI-1  Add expiry leases to charging dock reservations, matching Traffic Manager
      semantics. Owner: Jae-won Park. Shipped in 4.2.2 on 2024-09-16. DONE.

AI-2  Replace strict SoC comparisons with tolerance-band comparisons throughout
      the Charge Scheduler. Owner: Jae-won Park. Shipped in 4.2.2. DONE.

AI-3  Firmware 3.8.2: ensure reported SoC crosses configured thresholds cleanly
      rather than latching inside the hysteresis band. Owner: Tobias Lindqvist.
      Shipped 2024-09-17. DONE.

AI-4  Add fleet-level alerting: robots-available-for-dispatch, dock queue depth,
      and sustained throughput deviation, each with a defined threshold and
      page. Owner: Rosa Iglesias. Shipped in 4.2.2. DONE.

AI-5  Establish an automated cross-version CI matrix testing every supported
      Fleet OS release against every firmware release inside the twelve-month
      compatibility window. Owner: Deepa Nair. Completed 2024-11-08. This is the
      most important item on this list. DONE.

AI-6  Add a bulk "clear all stale dock reservations" action to the Operator
      Console so this class of mitigation is one action rather than sixty-one.
      Owner: Grace Chen. Shipped in 4.2.3. DONE.

AI-7  Audit every remaining resource reservation in Fleet OS for missing expiry
      semantics. Owner: Jae-won Park. Completed 2024-10-22; two further
      unleased reservations found in the pick-face allocator and corrected in
      4.2.3. DONE.

AI-8  Add the deadlock recovery procedure to the Fleet Recovery Runbook with
      explicit diagnostic steps. Owner: Marcus Ozturk. DONE — see runbook
      section 4.

AI-9  Full unification of the Traffic Manager and Charge Scheduler reservation
      systems onto a single implementation. Owner: Jae-won Park. Deferred to
      Fleet OS 5.0 as tracked architectural debt. NOT a hotfix item; the 4.2.2
      leases close the operational risk.


LESSONS

The lesson we are recording formally is this: when two components solve the same
class of problem, they must share an implementation or the difference between
them must be documented as deliberate. Fleet OS had a correct, battle-tested
solution to resource deadlock in the Traffic Manager. The Charge Scheduler was
written later, by different people, and reinvented the same problem badly. The
gap between "we know how to do this" and "we do this everywhere" is where this
incident lived.

The second lesson is that independently versioned artifacts that must
interoperate require combinatorial testing, not documentation. A compatibility
matrix that is not executed is a statement of intent.
