HELIX ROBOTICS — OPERATIONS RUNBOOK
Document: Fleet Recovery Runbook
Applies to: Helix Fleet OS 4.2.x
Owner: Marcus Ozturk, Director of Field Operations
Contributors: Rosa Iglesias (SRE Lead), Aisha Bello (Director of Customer Support)
Last revised: 2024-10-30
Audience: Helix field technicians, Helix on-call engineers, customer facility
          operators with Operator role or above
Classification: Internal — may be shared with Enterprise-tier customer staff


HOW TO USE THIS RUNBOOK

Each section is a self-contained procedure. Find the symptom, follow the steps
in order, and do not skip verification steps. If a procedure does not resolve
the issue within its stated time budget, escalate rather than improvising.

Escalation path and response commitments are defined in the Support SLA and
Escalation Policy. This runbook covers what to do; that document covers who to
call and how fast they must answer.

SAFETY NOTICE. Every procedure in this runbook is performed from the Operator
Console or from a Helix appliance. Nothing here requires entering the robot
operating area while robots are live. If a procedure appears to require floor
access, stop and follow the floor entry protocol in the Field Technician
Training Manual: the fleet must be paused and the zone locked out before entry.
Emergency stop authority always rests with firmware and with the physical e-stop
hardware, never with Fleet OS.


SECTION 1 — TRIAGE: WHICH PROCEDURE DO I NEED

Start here. Open the Operator Console dashboard and answer in order:

  Q1. Is the Fleet OS service reachable? If the console will not load, go to
      SECTION 2 (Fleet OS service recovery).

  Q2. Are robots faulted with a specific error code? If yes, look up the code in
      the Troubleshooting Guide first. Most coded faults have a specific remedy
      and do not need a fleet-level procedure.

  Q3. Are robots reporting healthy but not being assigned work? Go to SECTION 3
      (Dispatch stall).

  Q4. Are robots queuing at chargers, or is the number of robots available for
      dispatch declining while individual robots all report healthy? Go to
      SECTION 4 (Charge dock reservation deadlock). This is the signature of
      INC-2024-017.

  Q5. Is the customer WMS reporting sync errors, or are tasks not arriving at
      all? Go to SECTION 6 (Site Adapter recovery). Check for E-330.

  Q6. Is the primary Fleet OS appliance confirmed hardware-dead? Go to
      SECTION 5 (Warm standby failover). Enterprise tier only.


SECTION 2 — FLEET OS SERVICE RECOVERY

Symptom: Operator Console unreachable, or Fleet OS service unresponsive. Robots
will have completed their current task and be holding position. Nothing is
moving. The system has failed static — this is the designed behavior and is
safe.

Time budget: 10 minutes to restored service.

  2.1  SSH to the Fleet OS appliance. Credentials are in the site handover
       document; Helix staff use the field engineering jump host.

  2.2  Check service status:
           systemctl status helix-fleet-os

  2.3  If the service is running but unresponsive, capture diagnostics BEFORE
       restarting. This is not optional — a restart destroys the in-memory
       floor state that will be needed to explain what happened:
           helixctl diag capture --full --out /var/helix/diag/
       This takes 30 to 60 seconds.

  2.4  Restart the service:
           systemctl restart helix-fleet-os

  2.5  Wait for planning to resume. Expect 20 to 40 seconds. Durable state
       (facility map, robot registry, task history) is in PostgreSQL and is not
       lost. Live floor state is rebuilt from robot reports. Robots do NOT need
       to be re-homed.

  2.6  Verify:
           helixctl fleet status
       Confirm robot count matches expected fleet size and that task assignment
       has resumed.

  2.7  If the service fails to start, check disk space first — a full telemetry
       volume is the most common cause:
           df -h /var/helix
       Telemetry retention is 90 days. If the volume is full, do not delete
       files by hand. Run:
           helixctl telemetry prune --older-than 60d

  2.8  If still down after 10 minutes, escalate to Helix on-call.


SECTION 3 — DISPATCH STALL

Symptom: Robots are online, healthy, idle, and not receiving tasks. Work exists
in the customer WMS.

Time budget: 15 minutes.

  3.1  Confirm work is actually arriving. Check Site Adapter inbound task count:
           helixctl adapter stats
       If inbound count is zero or static, this is not a dispatch problem. Go to
       SECTION 6.

  3.2  Check the dispatch queue:
           helixctl dispatch queue --depth
       A deep queue with idle robots means assignment is failing, not that work
       is missing.

  3.3  Check for a fleet-wide pause. An operator may have paused the fleet from
       the console and not resumed it. This is more common than it sounds,
       particularly after a shift change:
           helixctl fleet state
       If paused, confirm with facility staff that the floor is clear, then
       resume from the Operator Console.

  3.4  Check whether robots are eligible for dispatch. A robot can be online and
       healthy but ineligible — below charge threshold, outside its assigned
       zone, or lacking the capability class the queued tasks require:
           helixctl fleet status --show-eligibility
       Pay attention to the ineligibility reason column. If a large number of
       robots are ineligible for charge reasons, go to SECTION 4.

  3.5  If eligibility looks correct and the queue is still not draining, restart
       the Dispatcher alone rather than the whole service:
           helixctl service restart dispatcher
       This is less disruptive than a full restart; the Traffic Manager keeps
       its floor state and in-flight tasks continue.

  3.6  Escalate if unresolved after 15 minutes.


SECTION 4 — CHARGE DOCK RESERVATION DEADLOCK

Symptom: Robots accumulating at or near charging docks. Dock queue depth
climbing. Robots available for dispatch declining. Critically: every individual
robot reports HEALTHY and no fault codes are present. Throughput degrades
progressively rather than dropping suddenly.

This procedure was added following INC-2024-017 (Cardinal Foods Memphis,
2024-09-14), in which 61 robots held dock reservations that were never released
and the fleet lost 71 percent of throughput over 6 hours 47 minutes. Read the
postmortem for that incident if you want the full root cause; the short version
is that a firmware SoC hysteresis change combined with a strict threshold
comparison in the Charge Scheduler, and dock reservations had no expiry lease to
recover from it.

Time budget: 20 minutes.

  4.1  FIRST: confirm version compatibility. This defect is fixed in Fleet OS
       4.2.2 and firmware 3.8.2. If the site is running Fleet OS 4.2.0 or 4.2.1
       together with firmware 3.8.1, you are almost certainly looking at
       INC-2024-017 recurrence.
           helixctl version
           helixctl fleet firmware --summary
       If this combination is present, plan the upgrade in step 4.7. Clearing
       reservations without upgrading only buys time — the units will re-enter
       the deadlock.

  4.2  Identify stuck reservations:
           helixctl dock reservations --stale
       On 4.2.2 and later, stale reservations are flagged automatically once
       their lease expires. On 4.2.0 and 4.2.1 there is no lease, so use:
           helixctl dock reservations --held-longer-than 2h

  4.3  Inspect the reported state of charge on the flagged units. The
       INC-2024-017 signature is a cluster of robots all reporting SoC pinned in
       a narrow band just above a configured threshold — typically 20.0 to 20.5
       percent — while physically fully charged:
           helixctl fleet status --show-soc --filter docked

  4.4  Clear the stale reservations. On 4.2.3 and later use the bulk action,
       which was added specifically because clearing 61 of these by hand during
       INC-2024-017 took 2 hours 20 minutes:
           helixctl dock reservations clear --stale --confirm
       From the Operator Console: Fleet > Charging > Clear Stale Reservations.

  4.5  On 4.2.0 through 4.2.2 there is no bulk action. Clear individually:
           helixctl dock reservations clear --robot <ROBOT_ID>
       Or per robot from the console: select robot > Charging > Cancel
       Reservation. Budget roughly two minutes per robot.

  4.6  Verify the dock queue drains and robots return to dispatch:
           helixctl dock queue --watch
       Recovery to baseline throughput typically takes 30 to 60 minutes after
       the queue clears, as the backlog of robots needing charge works through.

  4.7  Schedule the upgrade. Fleet OS 4.2.2 or later AND firmware 3.8.2 or
       later. Both are required — the Fleet OS fix (tolerance-band comparison
       plus dock reservation leases) and the firmware fix (clean threshold
       crossing) address different halves of the interaction. Coordinate with
       the customer through their TAM.

  4.8  Escalate to Helix on-call regardless of outcome. Any occurrence of this
       signature is reportable so we can confirm whether it is a recurrence or a
       new variant.


SECTION 5 — WARM STANDBY FAILOVER

Enterprise tier only. Failover is deliberately manual; do not automate it.
Two controllers that both believe they own the floor is a far worse outcome than
a two-minute cutover performed by a human.

Time budget: 5 minutes once the decision is made.

  5.1  CONFIRM THE PRIMARY IS GENUINELY DOWN. Not slow, not unreachable from
       your location — down. Verify from the appliance console or via out-of-band
       management. A split-brain failover is the worst outcome available here.

  5.2  Fence the primary. Power it off via the management interface. Do not skip
       this even if the primary appears already dead.

  5.3  On the standby:
           helixctl standby promote --confirm

  5.4  Wait for robot re-registration. Expect 60 to 90 seconds for the full
       fleet. Robots hold position during this window.

  5.5  Verify fleet size matches expected count:
           helixctl fleet status

  5.6  Notify the customer TAM and open an incident record. A failover is always
       incident-worthy even when it goes perfectly.


SECTION 6 — SITE ADAPTER RECOVERY

Symptom: E-330 WMS sync failure. Tasks not arriving, or task state diverging
between Fleet OS and the customer WMS. This is the highest-volume support
category by ticket count, and the cause is usually a change on the customer side.

Time budget: 30 minutes before escalation, longer if customer IT engagement is
needed.

  6.1  Check adapter health and last successful sync:
           helixctl adapter status

  6.2  Check connectivity to the WMS endpoint. Credential expiry and certificate
       expiry are the two most common causes, in that order:
           helixctl adapter test-connection

  6.3  Review adapter logs for the specific failure:
           journalctl -u helix-site-adapter --since "1 hour ago"

  6.4  If credentials or certificates have expired, this requires customer IT.
       Helix cannot rotate customer WMS credentials. Engage the TAM and the
       customer's integration contact.

  6.5  If the WMS is reachable and credentials are valid but message parsing is
       failing, the customer has likely changed their WMS schema or upgraded
       their WMS version. Capture a sample failing message and escalate to
       engineering with it attached. Do not attempt to hand-edit adapter
       mappings in production.

  6.6  Restart the adapter only after capturing logs:
           helixctl service restart site-adapter


SECTION 7 — POST-RECOVERY OBLIGATIONS

After any procedure in this runbook:

  7.1  Capture diagnostics if you have not already:
           helixctl diag capture --full

  7.2  Record the incident, including start time, detection method, procedure
       followed, and resolution time. Detection method matters — if the customer
       told us before our monitoring did, that is a monitoring gap and must be
       recorded as one. This was the single worst aspect of INC-2024-017.

  7.3  For any SEV-1, or any event with customer-visible throughput impact
       exceeding 30 minutes, a written postmortem is required within five
       business days. Use the postmortem for INC-2024-017 as the template.

  7.4  Check whether the event triggers an SLA credit. Assessment criteria are in
       the Support SLA and Escalation Policy. Do not discuss credit eligibility
       with the customer directly; that conversation belongs to the account team.
